# Parable Name and Bible Reference Goes Here!

[25] Large crowds were traveling with Jesus, and turning to them he said:

[26] “If anyone comes to me and does not hate father and mother, wife and
children, brothers and sisters—yes, even their own life—such a person cannot be
my disciple.

[27] And whoever does not carry their cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.

[28] “Suppose one of you wants to build a tower. Won’t you first sit down and
estimate the cost to see if you have enough money to complete it?

[29] For if you lay the foundation and are not able to finish it, everyone who
sees it will ridicule you,

[30] saying, ‘This person began to build and wasn’t able to
finish.’

[31] “Or suppose a king is about to go to war against another king. Won’t he
first sit down and consider whether he is able with ten thousand men to oppose
the one coming against him with twenty thousand?

[32] If he is not able, he will send a delegation while the other is still a long
way off and will ask for terms of peace.

[33] In the same way, those of you who do not give up everything you have cannot
be my disciples.

[34] “Salt is good, but if it loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again?

[35] It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; it is thrown out.
“Whoever has ears to hear, let them hear.”

## Questions

### Historical-cultural context

* Apart from its more familiar uses, salt can be used as a cleaning agent. The
  word ‘netter’ in Jer 2:22 may mean salt, and if so, would prove that salt was
  known as a cleaning agent in ancient Israel. Natron, a salt made mostly of
  hydrated soda ash, was used as a cleaning agent in ancient Egypt. John Calvin
  made much of the cleansing properties of salt in his commentary.
* However, most commentators tend to highlight the biblical role of salt
  in preserving and giving taste to food.
* In ancient Israel, salt was mostly sourced from salt marshes, and therefore
  contained many impurities. As the salt dissolved and washed out, you would be
  left with a pile of (tasteless) impurities. This could explain how Jesus can
  refer to salt which has lost its tang. (Though note that some Calvinists have
  argued from the fact that pure salt cannot lose its taste to the doctrine of
  the perseverance of the saints.)
* In about AD 6 - less than thirty years previously - ‘hundreds’ of followers
  of Judas of Galilee, an anti-Roman warrior, founder of the Zealot sect and
  possible false Messiah, were crucified. Crucifixion was known as an
  especially brutal Roman punishment for rebellion.
* Herod did prosecute a failed war against ‘a powerful Arabian prince.’ That
  could be a background to the second parable here.

### Identify need for the parable

* Is the purpose explicitly stated or implied?
* Is the parable responding to a question, request or complaint?
* Does the parable respond to Israel's rejection of Jesus as Messiah?
* Does the parable follow an exhortation or principle?
* Does the parable illustrate a situation?

### Analyze structure and details

* What remarkable details are there in the parable?
* Who are the main characters in the parable?
* What structural features of the narrative of the parable do you notice?
* What does the parable spend the most time on?
* What point does the parable conclude with?
* What is the main contrast in the parable?

### State the central truth of the parable and relate it to the Kingdom

* What is the central truth of the parable?
* What does this say about the Kingdom of God?

### Respond to the central truth of the parable

* How can we be like, or unlike, each of the characters in the parable?
* How can we be like, or unlike, Jesus' audience?
* How can we be like, or unlike, the gospel author's audience (the early church)?
* How might we change the way we live in response to the truth contained in
  this parable?
