# The Parable of the Master and Servant: Luke 17:7-10

[7] “Suppose one of you has a servant plowing or looking after the sheep. Will
he say to the servant when he comes in from the field, ‘Come along now and sit
down to eat’? 

[8] Won’t he rather say, ‘Prepare my supper, get yourself ready and wait on me
while I eat and drink; after that you may eat and drink’? 

[9] Will he thank the servant because he did what he was told to do? 

[10] So you also, when you have done everything you were told to do, should say,
‘We are unworthy servants; we have only done our duty.’”

## Questions

### Historical-cultural context

* 

### Identify need for the parable

* Is the purpose explicitly stated or implied?
* Is the parable responding to a question, request or complaint?
* Does the parable respond to Israel's rejection of Jesus as Messiah?
* Does the parable follow an exhortation or principle?
* Does the parable illustrate a situation?

### Analyze structure and details

* What remarkable details are there in the parable?
* Who are the main characters in the parable?
* What structural features of the narrative of the parable do you notice?
* What does the parable spend the most time on?
* What point does the parable conclude with?
* What is the main contrast in the parable?

### State the central truth of the parable and relate it to the Kingdom

* What is the central truth of the parable?
* What does this say about the Kingdom of God?

### Respond to the central truth of the parable

* How can we be like, or unlike, each of the characters in the parable?
* How can we be like, or unlike, Jesus' audience?
* How can we be like, or unlike, the gospel author's audience (the early church)?
* How might we change the way we live in response to the truth contained in
  this parable?
