# The Parable of the Pharisee and the Tax-Collector, Luke 18:8-14

9 To some who were confident of their own righteousness and looked down on everyone else, Jesus told this parable: 

10 “Two men went up to the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector. 

11 The Pharisee stood by himself and prayed: ‘God, I thank you that I am not like other people—robbers, evildoers, adulterers—or even like this tax collector. 

12 I fast twice a week and give a tenth of all I get.’

13 “But the tax collector stood at a distance. He would not even look up to heaven, but beat his breast and said, ‘God, have mercy on me, a sinner.’

14 “I tell you that this man, rather than the other, went home justified before God. For all those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.”

## Questions

### Historical-cultural context

* Tax collectors in Judea would typically have been Jews working for the Roman
  state, and might therefore have been regarded as sell-outs.
* Roman tax collectors were not paid a wage, but were effectively given official
  backing to collect as much as they could get away with as long as they passed
  on a fixed amount to Rome.
* Standing up to pray was at that time considered the proper thing to do.

### Identify need for the parable

* Is the purpose explicitly stated or implied?
* Is the parable responding to a question, request or complaint?
* Does the parable respond to Israel's rejection of Jesus as Messiah?
* Does the parable follow an exhortation or principle?
* Does the parable illustrate a situation?

### Analyze structure and details

* What remarkable details are there in the parable?
* Who are the main characters in the parable?
* What structural features of the narrative of the parable do you notice?
* What does the parable spend the most time on?
* What point does the parable conclude with?
* What is the main contrast in the parable?

### State the central truth of the parable and relate it to the Kingdom

* What is the central truth of the parable?
* What does this say about the Kingdom of God?

### Respond to the central truth of the parable

* How can we be like, or unlike, each of the characters in the parable?
* How can we be like, or unlike, Jesus' audience?
* How can we be like, or unlike, the gospel author's audience (the early church)?
* How might we change the way we live in response to the truth contained in
  this parable?
