# Parables of the Lost Sheep / Lost Coin / Prodigal Son, Luke 15:1-32

[1] Now the tax collectors and sinners were all gathering around to hear Jesus.

[2] But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law muttered, “This man welcomes sinners
and eats with them.”

[3] Then Jesus told them this parable:

[4] “Suppose one of you has a hundred sheep and loses one of them. Doesn’t he leave
the ninety-nine in the open country and go after the lost sheep until he finds it?

[5] And when he finds it, he joyfully puts it on his shoulders

[6] and goes home. Then he calls his friends and neighbors together and says, ‘Rejoice
with me; I have found my lost sheep.’

[7] I tell you that in the same way there will be more rejoicing in heaven over one
sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who do not need to repent.

[8] “Or suppose a woman has ten silver coins and loses one. Doesn’t she light a lamp,
sweep the house and search carefully until she finds it?

[9] And when she finds it, she calls her friends and neighbors together and says,
‘Rejoice with me; I have found my lost coin.’

[10] In the same way, I tell you, there is rejoicing in the presence of the angels
of God over one sinner who repents.”

[11] Jesus continued: “There was a man who had two sons.

[12] The younger one said to his father, ‘Father, give me my share of the estate.’
So he divided his property between them.

[13] “Not long after that, the younger son got together all he had, set off for a
distant country and there squandered his wealth in wild living.

[14] After he had spent everything, there was a severe famine in that whole country,
and he began to be in need.

[15] So he went and hired himself out to a citizen of that country, who sent him
to his fields to feed pigs.

[16] He longed to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no
one gave him anything.

[17] “When he came to his senses, he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired servants
have food to spare, and here I am starving to death!

[18] I will set out and go back to my father and say to him: Father, I have sinned
against heaven and against you.

[19] I am no longer worthy to be called your son; make me like one of your hired servants.’

[20] So he got up and went to his father.

“But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was filled with compassion
for him; he ran to his son, threw his arms around him and kissed him.

[21] “The son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
I am no longer worthy to be called your son.’

[22] “But the father said to his servants, ‘Quick! Bring the best robe and put it
on him. Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet.

[23] Bring the fattened calf and kill it. Let’s have a feast and celebrate.

[24] For this son of mine was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.’
So they began to celebrate.

[25] “Meanwhile, the older son was in the field. When he came near the house, he
heard music and dancing.

[26] So he called one of the servants and asked him what was going on.

[27] ‘Your brother has come,’ he replied, ‘and your father has killed the fattened
calf because he has him back safe and sound.’

[28] “The older brother became angry and refused to go in. So his father went out
and pleaded with him.

[29] But he answered his father, ‘Look! All these years I’ve been slaving for you
and never disobeyed your orders. Yet you never gave me even a young goat so I could
celebrate with my friends.

[30] But when this son of yours who has squandered your property with prostitutes
comes home, you kill the fattened calf for him!’

[31] “‘My son,’ the father said, ‘you are always with me, and everything I have is yours.

[32] But we had to celebrate and be glad, because this brother of yours was dead
and is alive again; he was lost and is found.’”

## Questions

### Historical-cultural context

* The ten silver coins in the Greek are drachmas: roughly a day’s wages.
* Caring for swine was shameful, because swine were classified as unclean
  animals under Jewish law (Lev 11:7).
* Slaves were considered a part of the family. Hired servants could be fired at
  a moment’s notice.
* Respectable grown men didn’t run.

### Identify need for the parable

* Is the purpose explicitly stated or implied?
* Is the parable responding to a question, request or complaint?
* Does the parable respond to Israel's rejection of Jesus as Messiah?
* Does the parable follow an exhortation or principle?
* Does the parable illustrate a situation?

### Analyze structure and details

* What remarkable details are there in the parable?
* Who are the main characters in the parable?
* What structural features of the narrative of the parable do you notice?
* What does the parable spend the most time on?
* What point does the parable conclude with?
* What is the main contrast in the parable?

### State the central truth of the parable and relate it to the Kingdom

* What is the central truth of the parable?
* What does this say about the Kingdom of God?

### Respond to the central truth of the parable

* How can we be like, or unlike, each of the characters in the parable?
* How can we be like, or unlike, Jesus' audience?
* How can we be like, or unlike, the gospel author's audience (the early church)?
* How might we change the way we live in response to the truth contained in
  this parable?
