# Parable of the Persistent Widow, Luke 18:1-8

[1] Then Jesus told his disciples a parable to show them that they should always pray and not give up.

[2] He said: “In a certain town there was a judge who neither feared God nor cared what people thought.

[3] And there was a widow in that town who kept coming to him with the plea, ‘Grant me justice against my adversary.’

[4] “For some time he refused. But finally he said to himself, ‘Even though I don’t fear God or care what people think,

[5] yet because this widow keeps bothering me, I will see that she gets justice, so that she won’t eventually come and attack me!’”

[6] And the Lord said, “Listen to what the unjust judge says.

[7] And will not God bring about justice for his chosen ones, who cry out to him day and night? Will he keep putting them off?

[8] I tell you, he will see that they get justice, and quickly. However, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on the earth?”

## Questions

### Historical-cultural context

* 

### Identify need for the parable

* Is the purpose explicitly stated or implied?
* Is the parable responding to a question, request or complaint?
* Does the parable respond to Israel's rejection of Jesus as Messiah?
* Does the parable follow an exhortation or principle?
* Does the parable illustrate a situation?

### Analyze structure and details

* What remarkable details are there in the parable?
* Who are the main characters in the parable?
* What structural features of the narrative of the parable do you notice?
* What does the parable spend the most time on?
* What point does the parable conclude with?
* What is the main contrast in the parable?

### State the central truth of the parable and relate it to the Kingdom

* What is the central truth of the parable?
* What does this say about the Kingdom of God?

### Respond to the central truth of the parable

* How can we be like, or unlike, each of the characters in the parable?
* How can we be like, or unlike, Jesus' audience?
* How can we be like, or unlike, the gospel author's audience (the early church)?
* How might we change the way we live in response to the truth contained in
  this parable?
